Add blog post - How MongoDB compares array (#2116)
FerretDB/FerretDB: website/blog/2023-02-21-ferretdb-compare-arrays.md

filter operators select records that are less than the query.
We use the following collection to demonstrate the `$lt` filter argument.

```js
db.ltexample.insertMany([
  { _id: 'scalar-null', v: null },
  { _id: 'scalar-number', v: 1 },
  { _id: 'scalar-string', v: 'a' },
  { _id: 'array-empty', v: [] },
  { _id: 'array-null', v: [ null ] },
  { _id: 'array-mixed', v: [ 1, 'z', 'b' ] },
  { _id: 'array-string', v: [ 'd' ] },
  { _id: 'array-bool', v: [ false ] },
  { _id: 'nested-empty', v: [ [] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-mixed', v: [ [ 'c' ], [ 1, 'z', 'b' ] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-string', v: [ [ 'g' ] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-bool', v: [ [ true ] ] }
])
```

**Example:** `$lt` Operator with Scalar Argument

When the filter argument is a string, documents with string records
that has less value would be selected.

```js
db.ltexample.find({v: {$lt: 'c'}})
```

The output:

```js
[
  { _id: 'scalar-string', v: 'a' },
  { _id: 'array-mixed', v: [ 1, 'z', 'b' ] }
]
```

The documents selected are `scalar-string` and `array-mixed`.

The `scalar-string` document has a smaller value compared to the filter argument.

> The array record `array-mixed` was selected because the smallest element `b` is

Reviewer: I think we need to bring the comparison between array and non array if want to use this example, we haven't explained how `array-mixed` got selected.

https://github.com/FerretDB/FerretDB/blob/bc761c53bb0ba74f2ce9e10870c6a223c6382c58/website/blog/2023-03-01.ferretdb-compare-arrays.md?plain=1#L123

Another option is remove everything array and nested array from the example.

Author: Thanks for pointing this out. I shouldn't have removed it. I'll bring it back now

less than the filter argument `c`.

If a document does not contain the same BSON type as the filter argument such as `array-null`, no selection is made.

**Example:** `$lt` Operator with Array Argument

When an array is used as the filter argument, documents with array fields containing values that are less than the values in the filter array are selected.
It also selects nested arrays if the inner array is less than the filter argument.

The following example applies the `$lt` operator with an array argument `['c']`.

```js
db.ltexample.find({v: {$lt: ['c']}})
```

The output:

```js
[
  { _id: 'array-empty', v: [] },
  { _id: 'array-null', v: [ null ] },
  { _id: 'array-mixed', v: [ 1, 'z', 'b' ] },
  { _id: 'nested-empty', v: [ [] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-mixed', v: [ [ 'c' ], [ 1, 'z', 'b' ] ] }
]
```

No scalar values were selected, because array argument only selects arrays.
The filter argument selected arrays that are less
and nested arrays which contain an array that is less.

> So _contains_ condition is applied on documents containing less than the filter argument, but not the other way around.

Reviewer: This condition needs to be explained in the earlier section with example I think.

Author: I can't seem to find where this was mentioned

Reviewer: It's this one https://github.com/FerretDB/FerretDB/blob/bc761c53bb0ba74f2ce9e10870c6a223c6382c58/website/blog/2023-03-01.ferretdb-compare-arrays.md?plain=1#L123

Reviewer: Maybe we need $eq to explain it. https://github.com/FerretDB/FerretDB/blob/bc761c53bb0ba74f2ce9e10870c6a223c6382c58/website/blog/2023-03-01.ferretdb-compare-arrays.md?plain=1#L240

Author: I'm hoping we don't expand it too much as-is. So, can we simply explain it in a sentence or two what that contain condition does without necessarily providing an example?

and nested arrays that contain less.

:::caution
This example shows an uncertain result of `$gt` operator.
:::

```js
db.gtexample.find({v: {$gt: ['c']}})
```

The output:

```js
[
  { _id: 'array-string', v: [ 'd' ] },
  { _id: 'array-bool', v: [ false ] },
  { _id: 'nested-empty', v: [ [] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-mixed', v: [ [ 'c' ], [ 1, 'z', 'b' ] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-string', v: [ [ 'g', 'z' ] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-bool', v: [ [ true ] ] }
]
```

No scalar documents were selected.

Here, we witness the same behaviour of `$lt` on array argument because it only selects array BSON type.

In the query, `array-bool` and `array-string` were selected since they contain values that is
greater than the filter argument of `c` at its first index.

The arrays are compared index to index using BSON comparison order then by value comparison.

When dealing with nested arrays, using the `$gt` operator on an array filter argument does not select the largest element from a nested array, unlike how `$lt` operates.

Instead, the `$gt` operator compares the array filter argument and the nested array in the collection index to index, using the BSON comparison order.

> If the BSON type of the array in the collection is greater than the BSON type of the filter argument (which is a string), then all nested arrays are selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because BSON type of the array in the collection is greater than the BSON type of the filter argument (which is a string), all nested arrays are selected.
```

This was my reasoning due to my finding

This is a significant difference from how the `$lt` filter works with an array argument.
`$lt` selects the smallest element from a nested array, while `$gt` compares index to index.

We are yet to fully understand how a nested array is expected to work with a filter comparison operator.

**Example:** `$gt` Operator with Nested Array Argument

:::caution
This example also shows an uncertain result of the `$gt` operator.
:::

The following example shows the `$gt` operator with a nested array argument `[['c']]`.

```js
db.gtexample.find({v: {$gt: [['c']]}})
```

The output:

```js
[
  { _id: 'array-bool', v: [ false ] },
  { _id: 'nested-mixed', v: [ [ 'c' ], [ 1, 'z', 'b' ] ] },
  { _id: 'nested-bool', v: [ [ true ] ] }
]
```

No scalar values from the collection were selected since the scalar values are not array type.

The selected array `array-bool` contains a boolean value, which has a greater BSON comparison order than that of an array type.

> Therefore, when comparing `['c']` with the items in the array, the largest item from the array (`false`) was used for the comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Actually this was due to index to index comparison.

For `nested-bool`, the array in the collection has a boolean value at the first index of the inner array, which has a greater BSON comparison order than the string in the filter argument.
This makes `nested-bool` greater than the filter argument.

Unlike `$lt` which takes the smallest element from the array, nested array is compared index to index in `$gt`.

## Nested array at FerretDB

At FerretDB, we do not support nested arrays at the moment.
This is due to the complexities caused by
differences in the comparison of array and other BSON types.

In particular, differentiating between the cases where the BSON comparison order of an array is used versus an element from the comparison array was not entirely straightforward.

Since then, we’ve taken time to understand the inner workings of comparison for various operations.

After investigating the behaviour of the `$lt` and `$gt` operators with array and nested array filter arguments, we discovered that the comparison process is different between the two cases.

> However, given an array argument filter and nested array collection, `$lt` uses the smallest element from the nested array and `$gt` on the other hand compares index to index of nested array collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, given an array argument filter and array collection, `$lt` uses the smallest element from the array and `$gt` on the other hand compares index to index of array collection.
```
It also works like that for nested array as well. But important to mention that array along is difficult
